# Notes

As mentioned in my story doc, "Assembly Language for the Applesoft
Programmer" was and is a book that is important to me - setting me on
a quest to learn 6502 assembly language, specifically for the
Apple ][. I wanted to learn those skills to become a game
developer. This book turns out not to offer a huge amount of game dev
insights (perhaps I will have other directories here that get closer
to that).

This directory contains my ASM files that either transcribe listings
from the book, or are my solutions to the various exercises through
the book.

I will also add comments and errata in this document to provide my
thoughts as I take another pass through this book.


## Errata

### Chapter 2, Page 26

Towards the end of the program, line 1140, there's an INX instruction
that ought to be followed by DEY. Insert that before the BPL LOOP
instruction, and the code should work.

Note that the generated BPL offset is now 0xF6 instead of 0xF7 as
printed in the book.


### Chapter 8, Page 146

The line describing POWER should indicate that the action taken is

(MFAC) <- (SFAC) ^ (MFAC)


### Chapter 8, page 165

In program 8.16, "SAVE" is defined to be $06, but in line 1080, the
generated machine code looks like it was defined to be $4000.

In the following paragraph, it talks about inspecting $06, so maybe
that's what was intended.

### Chapter 9, page 178

Maybe a real assembler would do this automatically, but CHARGOT is
defined to be $B7, but on line 1080, we JSR to it, which requires 2
bytes. Maybe make this $00B7?

### Chapter 10, page 210

Nitpick: the program is titled "Program", when it should probably be
10.6m1.

Also, line 1200 does a BNE loop, which seems like it ought to be based
off an INX instruction (see Program 10.6)

Also also, the listing steps from 423C to 5E3C in jumps of 400,
leaving out 5A3C?

Also also also, the listing describes memory location 7003 and 7008,
but A2 00 is at 7003, which ought to take us to 7005(?!)

I think that I see a space on the page between 7017 and 701D, I'm
guessing that somebody tried to physically cut and paste together two
listings.


### Chapter 10, page 215

AAAARRRGH!

Fairly significant problem with the program as written.

The keyin subroutine ($FD1B) overwrites the Y register. The program as
written sets the y register as an offset for where to write to the
screen, and loops for WIDTH steps, incrementing Y (INY) each step.

With keyin inside the loop, Y keeps getting overwritten each time the
user presses a key, meaning the output is in the wrong place on the
screen.

The easy fix is to move the JSR keyin line before LDY, outside the
loopi loop.

The text suggests removing the keyin to see the gremlin loaded all at
once, but indeed, (re)moving the keyin is necessary to see anything
but garbage.


### Chapter 11, page 227

line 1490 refers to OLDXL, 1500 to OLDXH, which are not defined. By
implication they are $03 and $04.


### Chapter 11, page 243

We are given a number of modifications to upgrade program 11.4 to
11.5, including references to BASL, which is referenced in earlier
text. In case you weren't reading carefully, it's $26

